Analysis of 1995 ACU Ratings of CongressAnalysis of 1995 ACU Ratings of CongressA NOTE ON VOTE SELECTION:Four  categories of votes.  As the umbrella lobbying
group of the conservative movement, ACUtracks a wide range of issues before the Congress,
ranging from taxes to abortion, from ballisticmissile defenses to term limits.  Accordingly, the
votes we choose to rate are broken down intofour general categories:  economic and budget matters;
social and cultural issues; defense andforeign policy matters; and issues of institutional
reform.  We endeavor to analyze a roughlyequal number of votes from each category, so that
we can obtain a comprehensive picture of anindividual Member's ideological predisposition, based
on votes cast.Votes rated on ideological distinction, NOT &quot;most
important.&quot;  Within those four broadareas, ACU selects the votes it rates based on a
simple criterion:  does the vote reflect a clearideological distinction in the Congress?  Thus, the
votes we select to rate are not necessarilythose considered the &quot;most important&quot; or
the &quot;key&quot; votes of any given congressional session.And they may not be votes we took a position or lobbied
on during floor consideration.  They arechosen for one reason, and one reason only:  to provide
a clear picture of where individualMembers of Congress stand on an ideological scale.Thus, for example, the 1993 vote on NAFTA was not
rated, though it clearly was one of the mostimportant votes of the session, in terms of legislative
impact.  The NAFTA vote was omittedfrom the 1993 ratings because it was not an ideologically-driven
vote:  many conservatives votedyes, while a significant number of conservatives
voted no.  Similarly, many liberals voted no, buta significant number voted yes.This simple but important criterion is helpful in
understanding any perceived differences betweena Member's ACU rating and his or her rating from
other organizations which provide ratings ofCongress, such as the AFL-CIO, the Christian Coalition,
or the Chamber of Commerce.Vote breakdown.  For the first session of the 104th
Congress, we rated 23 votes in the House,and 22 votes in the Senate.  In the House, two votes
were double-weighted:  final passage onterm limits, and the Balanced Budget Act.  In the
Senate, one vote was double-weighted:  theBalanced Budget Act.The breakdown is as follows:House                   Economic/budget           	6                     
Social/cultural                	7              
Defense/foreign policy     	4                    
Institutional Reform          	6                 SenateEconomic/budget           	6
Social/cultural                	8
Defense/foreign policy     	2
Institutional Reform          	6WHAT DO THE DATA SHOW?Two types of analysis.  We did two types of analysis
on the vote data:  the first, a &quot;snapshot&quot;look at the Congress in the first session of the
104th Congress; the second, a &quot;moving picture&quot;look at vote trends over the last ten years.104th Congress more conservative.  The snapshot analysis
reveals that the results of the 1994elections, in which Republicans took control of both
House and Senate for the first time in fourdecades, are reflected in the ideological vote patterns.
 Both House and Senate showed significantincreases in their &quot;conservative quotient,&quot;
as would be expected.In the House, there were 31 perfect conservative
scores of 100; there were 9 perfect liberal scoresof 0.  Of the 73 Republican freshmen, there were
15 perfect 100s; thus, though they represent lessthan one-fifth of the entire House, they accounted
for just less than half of all the perfect 100s.The most conservative Democrat in the House was Ralph
Hall, who scored a 76.  The mostliberal Republican in the House was Connie Morella,
who scored a 25.FYI:  Newt Gingrich scored a 100; Dick Armey scored
a 92; Tom DeLay scored an 83; JohnBoehner scored an 88; Dick Gephardt scored a 12;
David Bonior scored a 12; Vic Fazio scoredan 8.In the Senate, there were 7 perfect conservative
scores of 100; there were 11 perfect liberal scoresof 0.The perfect conservative Senators were Kyl, Smith,
Helms, Faircloth, Gramm, Nickles, andInhofe.  The perfect liberal Senators were Boxer,
Inouye, Akaka, Sarbanes, Levin, Kerrey,Lautenberg, Bingaman, Moynihan, Leahy, and Murray.The most conservative Democrat in the Senate was
a tie between Jim Exon and Fritz Hollings,both of whom scored a 35.  The most liberal Republican
in the Senate was Jim Jeffords, whoscored a 23.  FYI:  Bob Dole scored an 91; Trent Lott scored a
96; Thad Cochran scored an 83; Don Nicklesscored a 100; Tom Daschle scored a 4; Wendell Ford
scored a 13; Ted Kennedy scored a 4; ChrisDodd scored a 4.  Congress becoming more ideologically polarized. 
The moving picture analysis, in whichvoting trends over the last ten years were analyzed,
provides evidence for the conventionalwisdom that the Congress is becoming more polarized
along ideological lines.Republicans becoming more conservative, Democrats
more liberal.  In both House andSenate, the analysis indicates that incoming freshman
Republicans are voting more conservativethan the departing Republicans, and that incoming
freshman Democrats are voting more liberalthan the departing Democrats.  (Use charts for elaboration.)Opposition provokes partisan and ideological unity.
 A close analysis of the 1993 and 1995vote patterns reveals interesting party unity scores.
 In 1993, when the Democrats controlled theWhite House for the first time in 12 years, long-suppressed
liberal legislation came to the floorfor votes.  Even liberal Republicans couldn't stomach
some of this legislation, and they votedwith their more conservative Republican colleagues
in opposition.  As a result, party unity scoresfor Republicans were much higher than normal, with
most Republicans posting higherconservative scores than would otherwise have been
expected.In 1995, the exact opposite occurred:  with conservative
legislation coming to the floor for thefirst time in four decades, it was the Democrats
who showed greater ideological unity inopposition, thereby resulting in most Democrats posting
higher liberal scores than wouldotherwise have been expected.  Meanwhile, liberal
Republicans fractured, resulting in somescores for liberal Republicans that were even lower
than usual.